.\" Apple //e emulator manpage
.\"
.\" MODIFICATION HISTORY
.\"  v0.8 by Aaron Culliney @ BitR0t.com                      Feb 2014.
.\"  v0.5 by Aaron Culliney <chernabog@baldmountain.bbn.com>, Feb 1998.
.\"  v0.6 by Aaron Culliney <chernabog@baldmountain.bbn.com>, Aug 1998.
.\"    This code has nothing to do with my employer, GTE Internetworking,
.\"    BBN Technologies.  It was written completely on my own time and on
.\"    my own machine.
.\"
.TH APPLE2IX 6 "v0.8 February 2014"
.UC 7
.SH NAME
apple2ix \- Apple //e emulator
.SH SYNOPSIS
.ft B
apple2ix
.ft R
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I apple2ix
emulates a 128k Apple //e computer. To use the emulator effectively you need to
acquire the original //e ROM file which is not distributed due to copyright
reasons.  The emulator reads standard 143360-byte and 232960-byte disk image
files with
.I .dsk
,
.I .do
, and 
.I .nib
suffixes.
.PP
There are only a few command line options:
.TP
.I --help
Display a quick help
.TP
.I --version
Display version of emulator
.TP
.I --noshm
Run emulator with no shared memory (for remote X11 desktops)
.PP
.ft R
.SH THE .apple2 FILE
The emulator reads user preferences from a
.I .apple2
file located in your home directory.  This file is auto-magically created for
you.
.I .apple2
You can edit the settings using your favorite editor, but most of the settings
can be adjusted from the emulator itself (see menus section below).
.TP
.I speed
Multiple of the Apple //e CPU speed.  1.0 attempts to match the speed of the
//e.  2.0 is twice as fast.  0.5 is half.
.TP
.I altspeed
Alternate speed setting.  F9 key in emulator will toggle between this and the
regular configured speed.  This is useful to slow or speed up emulation as
needed.
.TP
.I disk path
Toplevel path of disk images directory.  Personally I like
/path/to/your/home/directory/.apple2ix/disks
.TP
.I color
Color modes.  One of Black/white, color, interpolated.
.TP
.I video
The size of the emulation 1X, 2X 
.TP
.I volume
Speaker Volume setting 0-10
.TP
.I joystick
Off, joy keypad, or pc joystick
.TP
.I pc joystick parms
PC Joystick calibration parameters.  This is best adjusted from the calibration
routine from within the emulator.  Press F10 to bring up the settings menu and
select Calibrate Joystick.
If the emulator complains that it cannot open the joystick device, make sure
your joystick or gamepad is connected to the PC and make sure the Linux joystick
module is loaded.
.TP
.I keypad joystick parms
Keypad/arrow-keys joystick parameters.  Change this through the calibration
routine from the F10 settings menu.
.TP
.I system path
The directory holding the rom files.  The emulator won't run if this is not set
properly.  You can only change this by editing the
.I .apple2
file.
.PP
A sample .apple2 file:
.nf
        speed = 1.00
        altspeed = 4.00
        disk path = /usr/local/games/apple2/disks
        color = interpolated
        video = 1X
        volume = 8
        joystick = joy keypad
        system path = /usr/local/games/apple2/rom
        pc joystick parms = 128 128 255 1 255 1
        keypad joystick parms = 8 1
.fi
.PP
.ft R
.SH ROM FILES
The emulator requires several ROM files to run.
.TP
.I slot6.rom
You need this file for basic disk drive emulation.  It is 256 byte
memory dump of the consecutive addresses from C600 to C6FF. This file
is not distributed again due to copyright issues.  This file may also
be named
.I controller.rom,
but is referenced internally as
.I slot6.rom.
.TP
.I apple_IIe.rom
It is the 32K ROM of your 128k Apple //e, a dump of main memory (bank 0)
addresses C000-FFFF concatenated with auxiliary memory (bank 1) addresses
C000-FFFF.  Because the
.I apple_IIe.rom
contains the C600 slot, you can construct the
.I slot6.rom
file from this one. The
.I apple_IIe.rom
file may also be named
.I apple2e.rom
but is referenced internally as
.I apple_IIe.rom.
.PP
.ft R
.SH DISK IMAGES
The emulator reads standard DOS3.3-order 143360 byte '.dsk' images (sometimes
with a '.do' extension and raw-nibble 232960 byte '.nib' images.  The emulator
will also attempt to read and write to compressed disk images with an additional .gz
extension.
.PP
The images are raw binary dumps, containing the tracks from 0 to 34 from the
original 5.25 disk.  For the standard 143360 byte '.dsk' format each track is
partitioned into sectors of 256 bytes, numbered from 0 to 15.
.PP
The raw nibblized 232960-byte images are usually made of programs that have
non-standard formatting as a means of copy protection.  The nibblized format
attempts to preserve the non-standard format, and so defeats the copy protection
without "cracking" the program.
.PP
To transfer Apple ][ diskettes into one of these formats requires that you own
an original Apple ][. Since the drives provided by the IBM PC's are not
compatible with the original Apple ][ drives there are no conversion programs
directly available. If you have used other Apple ][ emulators it is most likely
that the files will work with this emulator too. For more information on Apple
][ disk formats and such, see
.I Beneath Apple DOS
by Don Worth and Pieter Lechner, published long ago by Quality Software.
.PP
.ft R
.SH EMULATOR KEYS/MENUS
.TP
.I F1
Interface to switch disk in Drive A, Slot 6.  Arrow keys navigate the
selection.  If the disk highlighted is already in the drive, it will
have a <rw1> or <r1> tag after the name indicating read/write or
read-only access.  Select this disk to eject it.  To select a disk,
you can press 'w' or RETURN to insert it into the drive.  Pressing 'w'
will attempt to open the disk as read/write (if you have permission to
do so).
Pressing RETURN defaults to opening the disk read-only.  Press
ESC to accept current settings and exit the menu.
.TP
.I F2
Interface to switch disk in Drive B, Slot 6.  Same controls as for
.I F1.
.TP
.I Pause/Break key
Pause the emulation.  Hit a key to resume emulation.
.TP
.I F5
Display the Apple //e keyboard layout.
.TP
.I F7
Enter the Debugger console (if this support was compiled into the
program).  See the file README.debugger that came with the emulator for
more information.
.TP
.I F8
The boot/welcome screen!  Just in case you need to get back here =)
.TP
.I F9
Toggles between the speed and altspeed settings.  This is useful to 'fastboot'
programs, or possibly to slow them down, and then slip back to normal Apple //e
speed.
.TP
.I F10
General parameter settings menu, including the all-important QUIT option.
You can edit most of the parameters in your
.I .apple2
file from this menu.  Adjusting a parameter will auto-magically save it to your
.I .apple
preferences file.
You can also select to calibrate/tune the PC Joystick or keypad joystick here.
.TP
.I Special Keys
The key combination Ctrl-End will trigger an Apple //e reset.  Ctrl-AltLeft-End
operates just like a Ctrl-OpenApple-Reset and reboots the Apple //e.  AltLeft
and AltRight keys correspond to the OpenApple and ClosedApple keys (joystick
buttons 0 & 1).  NOTE: In //e mode try Ctrl-AltRight-End to trigger a system
self-test.  The numeric keypad and general arrow keys are also used for emulated
joystick movement.
.ft R
.SH BUGS AND STUFF
See the PROBLEMS file that came with the code.
.ft R
.SH MORE INFO
More information is available in the online newsgroups
.I comp.emulators.apple2,
and
.I comp.sys.apple2.
.PP
See also:
.TP
.I Apple //e Technical Reference Manual
.TP
.I Beneath Apple DOS
.TP
.I Beneath Apple ProDOS
.ft R
.SH AUTHORS
See the AUTHORS file that was packaged with this software.
